---
title: Morpheus
date: 2023-08-25
publishdate: 2023-08-25
weight: 20
nav: false
people:
- key: floriane.odje
- key: andrea.volkamer
funding:
- name: Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF)
  link: https://www.bmbf.de/bmbf/en/ministry/research-funding/research-funding_node.html
---

The MORPHology-based Endocrine Disruptor Screening [Morpheus] project aims to develop deep learning models to predict the effects of substances and identify characteristic fingerprints based on morphological and molecular input data.

<!--more-->

Morpheus project aims to enable the efficient identification and characterisation of endocrine-like substances with harmful effects on humans and the environment. Those substances are often studied in time-consuming experiments involving animals raising ethical issues. Our partner (BfR and FMP) propose to study them using in vitro methods such as cell painting assay.
Cell painting assay output, called morphological fingerprints, reveals how the substances impact cell viability. This information is easily interpretable by computers, as fingerprints, thus we propose to develop machine learning and deep learning methods that leverage information from them. Such tools would help in predicting substance effects, identifying characteristic fingerprints of hazardous compounds and predicting morphological fingerprints using molecules as input.
These models will be iteratively trained and validated based on freely available data, as well as applied and optimized on new profiles successively generated by the project partners from BfR and FMP. Finally, the generated in silico models will be applied to effectively search extensive substance libraries and investigate different family compounds, which will also be experimentally verified.
